Second section
A.A.K.vs.Türki̇ye
(Request no 56578/11)
STOP
Art 8 • Privacy • Put under the applicant's judicial supervision, after a
procedure having concluded that it suffered from a mental disorder hampering its capacity
to act • existence of effective guarantees in the internal procedure to prevent
abuse by ensuring that the rights and interests of the applicant be taken in
account • Participation of the applicant in the decision -making process at all stages of
the procedure • Judicial mechanism which proceeded with equity and diligence
necessary as well as having gathered enough elements to assess the
applicant faculties and to prevent possible injustices • Limitation of
measurement in time and in its object • Possibility of periodic revision of two
years, for the lifting of the supervisory measure • Measurement lifted by a court
in accordance with the conclusions of a new psychiatric expertise
Strasbourg
October 3, 2023
This judgment will become final under the conditions defined in article 44 § 2 of the
Convention.He can undergo formation of shape.
A.A.K.vs.Türki̇ye
1 in the A.A.K.vs.Türkiye,
The European Court of Human Rights (second section), sitting
In a room made up of:
Arnfinn Bårdsen, president,
Jovan Ilievski,
Egidijus Kūris,
Saadet Yüksel,
Lorraine Schembri Orland,
Diana Sârcu,
Davor Derenčinović, judges,
and Hasan Bakırcı, section clerk,
Seen :
the request (no 56578/11) directed against the Republic of Türkiye and of which
A national of this state, Mrs. A.A.K.("The applicant") seized the courtyard
under article 34 of the human rights convention
and fundamental freedoms ("the Convention") on June 17, 2011,
The decision to bring to the attention of the Turkish government
("The government") the request,
parties' observations,
After having deliberated it in the Council Chamber on September 5, 2023,
Make the stop that here, adopted on this date:
INTRODUCTION
1. This case concerns the judicial supervision of the
applicant, after a procedure where it was concluded that it was suffering from a
mental disorder hampering its ability to act.She raises questions under
the angle of articles 6 and 8 of the Convention, taken in isolation and combined with
Article 13.
ACTUALLY
2. The applicant was born in 1955 and resides in Yenipazar (Aydın).She was
Represented by Me S. Cengiz, lawyer in İzmir.
3. The government was represented by its co-agent Ms. Aysun
Akceviz, acting chief of the Department of Human Rights of the Ministry
of the justice of the Republic of Türkiye.
I. The genesis of the case
4. January 18 and 21, 2002, the applicant - architect by profession and
Professor of private lessons - was examined at the Medical Institute for the purpose of
The establishment of his psychiatric table.A neurotic disorder
Accompanied by a light schizoid state was diagnosed.
A.A.K.vs.Türki̇ye
25. On October 13, 2004, it was re -examined by the doctors of the Institute
Medolegal.According to the report made accordingly, she suffered from a
Ordinary schizophrenia.
6. In December 2007, one of its private students in progress informed the
applicant that the teacher N.E. of his class had disclosed the students a
Much of the questions prepared for the purpose of a departmental competition.
The applicant transmitted this denunciation to the competent authorities.HAS
The opportunity when N.E. had tried to speak to her, she exclaimed: "Species
unworthy, why did you steal the questions (...), I will reveal all your
scams ”.
7. On May 14, 2008, public action was introduced by the prosecutor of
Yenipazar ("the prosecutor") against the applicant for insulting against a
civil servant, namely, N.E.
In his memory of May 27, 2008, tabled during his trial, the
An applicant accused the H.C. clerk of having been recruited by illegal means.
At the hearing of October 23, 2008, she explained that she was caught in H.C., because
that he had disturbed her "dazzling her with his eyes".
8. By a judgment of November 6, 2008, the district court of
Yenipazar ("the court") sentenced the applicant to ten months
suspended imprisonment.
9. On July 7, 2008, the prosecutor again defeated the applicant before the
Court to insult a state agent, namely H.C. on November 27, 2008,
She was also sentenced to this chief to two months and fifteen days
suspended imprisonment.
10. On December 26, 2008, the prosecutor called on this last judgment,
believing that the behavior as well as the confused statements and writings of the
applicant would have required proceedings beforehand to an assessment of
its mental capacity.
11. On February 11, 2009, the teacher N.E. was received a blame at
the outcome of a disciplinary procedure to obstruct the equity of a competition
public.
II.The judicial supervision of the applicant
12. On April 10, 2009, the Aydın prosecutor's office charged the prosecutor to instruct
on the question of whether the applicant should be put under guardianship by
Application of article 405 § 1 of the Civil Code No 4721 ("CC" - paragraph 40
below).
On May 4, the prosecutor asked for a copy of business files
criminals having involved the applicant.After examination, on May 12, 2009, he captured
The court under article 405 § 2 of the CC (Ibidem).
13. The debates were opened before the court on May 13, 2009. The judge
decided the applicant's medical examination at Adnan University Hospital
Menderes ("the hospital") and the establishment of a list of people
A.A.K.vs.Türki̇ye
3 which to be his legal tutor as well as an inventory of his
heritage.
According to information communicated to the court, the applicant does not
had no property or bank savings.
14. On an unpropelical date, the applicant asked in writing to the bar
of Aydın to designate him a lawyer committed, as assistance
judicial.
15. The court held its first hearing on June 4, 2009. It turned out that the
Delayer opposed her medical examination at the hospital.The judge ordered
It is up to the local security management to execute this measure.
16. By a decision of June 11, 2009, the Aydın bar removed the
request for legal assistance from the applicant, on the grounds that she had a
monthly income located between 600 and 1,000 Turkish pounds, estimated amount
Enough to mandate advice.
17. On June 10, 2009, the court was informed that the tutor most capable of
Protecting the applicants' interests would be H.K., namely her husband.
18. On June 29, 2009, the applicant formed opposition against the decision of
Aydın bar (paragraph 16 above).
19. On July 9, 2009, the Aydın bar welcomed the opposition of the
applicant and charged Me M.A. to represent it ex gratia.
20. The second audience took place on July 16, 2009, in the presence of the
applicant, who informed the court that a lawyer for the Aydın bar was going to
Representing and that she had gone well the required medical examination.
The court took note of the fact that the medical report relating to it was by train
to be put in the net.
21. On August 14, 2009, the Hospital Health Council issued its report
psychiatric evaluation, after examining the applicant: he was there
specified that it suffered from "paranoid personality disorders" and,
Although not being able to appreciate the reality of events, it
firmly denied his psychic state.According to doctors, it justified his
tutorship;If it was possible that the applicant healed from this
condition with appropriate treatment, however, she had refused care
offered for this purpose.
According to the applicant, the doctors would have spoken out sheltered
a consultation not fulfilling the criteria appropriate to this act
medical.
22. On August 27, 2009, Me M.A. resigned from the Aydın bar,
arguing his deep disagreement with the applicant who had required him to
challenge the court judge for partiality, based on
exclusively personal reasons, devoid of any objectivity,
That is to say contrary to law.
23. It appears from the file that on September 19, 2009, the applicant suffered
other tests and a psychological interview, it seems, at the service of
A.A.K.vs.Türki̇ye
4 Psychiatry of the Faculty of Legal Medicine of the University Hospital
Istanbul.
24. At the hearing of September 17, 2009, Me M.A. declared that she was
dismissed of her duties (paragraph 22 above) and that the applicant
was to be informed.The court gave reading of a faxes,
sent by the applicant.
25. By a decision of September 24, 2009, the Aydın bar considered
founded the excuse of Me M.A. then canceled the judicial aid granted to the
Request.
26. At the following hearing of October 1, 2009, the applicant
explained that she asked the Istanbul bar to designate a new
advice, as well as have requested the Istanbul university hospital for the purposes
new expertise (paragraph 23 above).
27. On October 20, 2009, the Aydın bar informed the court that help
judicial granted to the applicant had been revoked and that no other lawyer
would not be automatically committed.
28. At the hearing of October 22, 2009, he was read the
minutes, due to the change of the judge.The applicant was heard at
new.She challenged the expert report of August 14, 2009 (paragraph 21
above) and recalled that she had already addressed the university hospital
of Istanbul for a new evaluation (paragraph 26 above).
The court assigned the applicant's husband to appear and, welcoming
the opposition that she trained against the first expertise, he decided to
Solicit the Medical Institute to determine if the interested party suffered
Always disorders justifying its guardianship.
29. At the hearing of November 24, 2009, the applicant was present,
Accompanied by her husband H.K .;The latter declared that, if he was appointed, he
would assume the supervision mission with all the responsibilities that this
would imply.
30. On December 23, 2009, the applicant was led to the Institute
forensic and examined by the Council of Specialists No 4, under the number
2009/605 consultation.The psychogram established after interviews
revealed a psychotic state.
However, according to the applicant, she would not have taken any real examination
at the Medical Institute and everything would have been decided on the basis of its previous
case.
31. On January 21, 2010, the court, with the applicant's agreement, decided
to wait until the report of the Medical Institute is finalized.
32. This report was paid to the file on January 29, 2010. reporting
psychiatric history of the applicant (paragraphs 4 and 5 above) and
reconsidering the new elements of the file, the Medical Institute
confirmed that the applicant having "paranoid disorders" and having
So not the ability to act, it was necessary to designate him a tutor.
A.A.K.vs.Türki̇ye
5 The Medicolegal Institute specified that these disorders were of a level and
nature capable of removing the freedom to discern and act accordingly, as well as
that the ability to analyze events to draw conclusions
healthy.Also, the applicant was not able to identify and protect
his own interests or to resist the manipulative influences of others;in
In short, she was unable to engage in anything in a way
Autonomous and free.
33. On March 2, 2010, H.K., supported by the applicant, challenged this second
report and asked for its revision by the plenary of the Medical Institute
Istanbul.The court dismissed this request, on the grounds that the report criticized
did not present any contradiction and was therefore sufficient to establish a
judgement.
By a judgment pronounced the same day, the applicant was put under the
guardianship of her husband H.K. He had to pay this duty for a
initial duration of two years, likely to be extended for the same duration,
If the court was seized of a request in this direction.It emerges from the device
that the measure essentially aimed at the management of the applicant's heritage,
that H.K. had been enjoined to account each year on management
of the inventory of goods paid to the file and that the land management and the
banks had been prohibited from concluding any
act without the approval of the court.
34. On March 25, 2010, the applicant was herself in a cassation,
drawing in particular means of his exclusion from the benefit of a lawyer during the
procedure, of the partial attitude of the court judge whom she had sought in
vain to challenge and the non-proofing nature of the report of the Medical Institute
established at its expense (paragraphs 30 and 32 above).
By a judgment of December 6, 2010, the Court of Cassation dismissed the
applicant, considering the judgment underway in accordance with the law and the procedure.
The judgment was notified to the H.K. tutor on January 14, 2011.
35. The applicant introduced an appeal in rectification of a stop.By one
decision of March 14, 2011, the Court of Cassation rejected this appeal, on the grounds that
This path was closed against the judgments rendered in the supervisory cases.
III.The request for the release of the supervision measurement
36. On July 9, 2014, about four years and four months later, the
tutor H.K. seized the Nazilli district court to request the lifting of
the guardianship measure.Recalling that the hospital had previously specified that a
reinstatement of his wife was possible under appropriate treatment
(paragraph 21 above), he argued that the applicant did not show
No more frank symptoms of illness.Leaving, H.K. asked that two
university hospitals are responsible for carrying out new expertise
psychiatric.
A.A.K.vs.Türki̇ye
637. On July 11, 2014, the court welcomed this request and ordered
the applicant's examination by the hospital's medical services
Istanbul academic as well as by those of the Dokuz University Hospital
Eylül d'İzmir.
38. The first hospital rendered its detailed report on February 27, 2015.
Convinced that the personality "obsessive-compulsive-narcissistic" of the
applicant no longer reached a threshold serious enough to compromise his health
mental, doctors concluded that there was no longer any need to maintain
The interested party under supervision.
39. By a judgment of March 19, 2015, the court entered this conclusion
and raised the attacked measure.
The internal legal framework and practice
Relevant
I. Turply under guardianship
40. Article 405 §§ 1 and 2 of the Civil Code No 4721 ("CC") is thus labeled:
"1. is put under guardianship, any adult person who, due to a disease or
mental impairment, is unable to provide for its needs, or which requires a
permanent help for its needs and protection, or which jeopardizes security
of others.
2. Administrative bodies, notaries and courts which, in the exercise of
their functions, note the existence of a situation requiring a guardianship
must immediately inform the competent supervisory authority.»»
41. Article 409 of the CC has, for its part, that it cannot be ruled on
a request for investment under supervision due to mental illness or
insufficient mental faculties that on the basis of a report
medical.According to this article, the judge may hear the interested party before deciding,
If he considers it necessary having regard to the content of the medical report.
42. Under the terms of article 414 of the CC, the principle is to entrust the mission
of tutoring to the husband or the wife of the person concerned, except situation
exceptional.Under articles 472 and 474, any placement decision
under guardianship can be lifted as soon as it is no longer justified in light
of medical expertise.The lifting request can be presented as much by the
no one under guardianship by his tutor.
43. According to article 382 of the Code of Civil Procedure No. 6100, promulgated
On January 12, 2011, the questions related to the supervision under the
Non-contentious procedure.It is a simplified procedure and
inquisitory, where it is up to the judge to administer the evidence and evidence and
conduct all the necessary investigations on your own before
rule.It was exactly the same before the entry into force of said code,
but on the basis of the provisions stipulated in other laws, because
The old code did not expressly governing the non-contentive procedures.
A.A.K.vs.Türki̇ye
744. Article 36 of the Constitution enshrines the right of anyone,
applicant or defendant, to use all the legitimate means and ways to do
Affects its cause, ensuring its defense and benefiting from a fair trial
before the judicial bodies.
II.The Office Commission for a Lawyer
45. Apart from the legal aid which targets the exemption from the costs
judicial according to the Code of Civil Procedure, and whose granting falls under the
jurisdiction of the courts, the allocation of a law enforcement, as
of legal assistance, is governed by law no 1136 on the profession
lawyer, as modified by law No. 4667 of May 2, 2001 and by the
Regulation No. 25418 of March 30, 2004. According to article 176 of this law,
The assistance in question is provided to people not being able
to assume the costs of representation by a lawyer.
The request for legal assistance - duly supported and documented - is
made to the office formed for this purpose within the bar concerned;This
office is made up of lawyers commissioned by the board of directors of
Bar;Rejection of the request is likely to oppose the
Bâtonnier (article 178).If the request is welcomed, the office designates a
lawyer committed, which is required to carry out all tasks
falling under the profession.If the lawyer committed asks to be apologized
of his mission, he should pay an amount equivalent to
fees provided for it (article 179), unless resignation is
justified.
III.The texts of the Council of Europe
46. Recommendation no R (99) 4 adopted on February 23, 1999 of the Committee
ministers to the Member States on the Protection Principles
legal of incapable adults ("principles"), provides for the following, in
Part II:
"Principle 1 - Respect for human rights
Concerning the protection of incapable adults, the fundamental principle serving as
basis to those identified in this text is respect for the dignity of each person
As a human being.Laws, procedures and practices concerning the protection of
incapable major must be based on respect for human rights and freedoms
fundamental, taking into account the restrictions of these rights contained in
relevant international legal instruments.
Principle 7 - equitable and effective character of the procedure
1. Procedures leading to the adoption of protective measures of adults
incapable should be fair and effective.
2. Appropriate procedural guarantees should be provided to protect
human rights of the person concerned and to prevent any abuse.
A.A.K.vs.Türki̇ye
8 Principe 8-Pre-eminence of the interests and well-being of the person concerned
1. When establishing or implementing a protective measurement of a
unable major, the interests and well-being of the latter must be taken into account
pre -eminently.
2. This principle implies in particular that the choice of a person to represent or
assist the incapable adult must above all be governed by the ability of this person to
Protect and promote the interests and well-being of the adult concerned.
3. This principle also implies that the property of the incapable adult is managed and
Used for its benefit and to ensure its well-being.
Principle 9 - Respect for the wishes and feelings of the person concerned
1. When establishing or implementing a protective measurement of a
unable to be incapable, it is necessary, as far as possible, to seek, to take in
account and duly respect the wishes passed and present, and the feelings of
the interested party.
2. This principle implies in particular that the wishes of the concerned adult
a person's choice to represent or assist him must be taken into account and,
As far as possible, duly respected.
3. It also follows that a person representing or assisting a major
incapable must provide him with adequate information whenever possible
and appropriate, in particular with regard to any important decision affecting the
major, so that the latter can express his opinion.»»
47. Concerning the procedural regime relating to it, the said recommendation
States :
"Principle 12 - Survey and evaluation
1. The appropriate procedures should be provided with regard to the survey
and the evaluation of personal adult faculties.
2. No protection measure having the effect of restricting legal capacity
of an incapable adult should not be taken unless the person takes the measure
has not seen the interested party or has not read his situation and only a recent report,
Established by at least one qualified expert, has not been produced.The report should be written or
recorded in writing.
Principle 13 - Right to be heard personally
The person concerned should have the right to be heard personally in the
framework of any procedure that may have an impact on its legal capacity.
Principle 14 - Duration, revision and appeal
1. Protective measures should, to the extent that is possible and
Indicated, be of a limited duration.Periodic revisions should be considered.
(...)
3. The appropriate remedies should be provided.»»
A.A.K.vs.Türki̇ye
9 on the right
On the alleged violation of article 8 of the
Convention
A. Subject of the dispute and admissibility
48. The applicant, deploring that her legal inability was
pronounced without valid reasons and in the absence of the assistance of a council,
In particular complaining that internal courts have not undertaken the
procedures necessary to ensure a law enforcement and to
respond to his disputes against medical reports that have founded
its guardianship;In short, the Turkish judicial system would not have been to
even to protect it from this disproportionate measure which would have ruined its
future.
In this regard, the applicant alleges a violation of her right to a trial
equitable guaranteed by Article 6 § 1 of the Convention as well as a
ignorance of his right to protect his private life in defiance of
Article 8, two provisions which it invokes in isolation and combined with
Article 13.
49. The Court observes that the main questions raised in this case
undoubtedly note the sphere of private and family life of the
applicant, because it is closely linked to identity and personal development
as well as the right to establish and develop relationships with its fellows
and the outside world;The court sees in this case no particular reasons
to get rid of its general tendency to place itself from the angle of article 8
Regarding such questions (see, for example, Bensaid c. United Kingdom,
No 44599/98, § 47, ECDH 2001 I, H.F. c.Slovakia, no 54797/00, § 47,
November 8, 2005, and A.N. c.Lithuania, no 17280/08, § 107, May 31, 2016).
50. Indeed, in this case, the difference between the purpose of the
guarantees of article 6 § 1 and that pursued by the guarantees of article 8
not necessarily justify the examination of the facts from the angle of each of these two
provisions (see, for example, Golder c. United Kingdom, February 21, 1975,
§§ 41 to 45, series A No 18, Bianchi c.Switzerland, no 7548/04, § 113, June 22, 2006,
and MacReady c.Czech Republic, nos 4824/06 and 15512/08, § 41, April 22
2010), especially since in this case the disputed procedure was governed by the
inquisitory principle, according to which, it is up to the court to seek
automatically the truth (paragraph 43 above);the situation of the parties in
procedures based on the inquisitorial principle is different from those founded
on the principle of contradictory, it being understood that in this case the active role
of the judge is an element that could pass to compensate for a certain
inequality of the parties to the procedure, so as to lessen the importance of a
separate examination from the angle of article 6 § 1.
A.A.K.vs.Türki̇ye
1051. mistress of the legal qualification of the facts of the cause (see,
Radomilja and others c.Croatia [GC], nos 37685/10 and 22768/12, § 126,
March 20, 2018, S.M. c.Croatia [GC], no 60561/14, § 243, June 25, 2020, and more
Recently, Telek and others c.Türkiye, nos 66763/17 and 2 others, § 76, March 21
2023, and Calvi and C.G. c.Italy, no 46412/21, § 73, July 6, 2023), the courtyard
therefore estimates that, in this case, the grievances raised in view of the
Articles 6 § 1 and/or 13 are absorbed by those drawn from article 8, under
Its procedural component (see, for example, Kutzner v. Germany, no 46544/99,
§§ 56 and 57, ECDH 2002 I, Diamante and Pelliccioni c.San Marino,
No 32250/08, § 151, September 27, 2011, Anghel c.Italy, no 5968/09, § 69,
June 25, 2013, G.B. c.Lithuanie, no 36137/13, § 113, January 19, 2016, and s.w.
vs.United Kingdom, no 87/18, § 78, June 22, 2021), which covers, not only,
legal proceedings, but also the administrative processes at stake
(paragraph 65 below).
It will therefore examine this species from the angle of article 8 of the
Convention, thus labeled in its relevant part:
"1. Everyone has the right to respect for their private and family life (...).
2. There may not be interference of a public authority in the exercise of this right that
as long as this interference is provided for by law and that it constitutes a measure which,
in a democratic society, is necessary (...), to public security, (...)
prevention of criminal offenses, protection of health or morality, or
protection of the rights and freedoms of others.»»
52. In the absence of preliminary exceptions formulated by the
Government, the Court notes that, within the defined framework above, the request
is not clearly poorly founded within the meaning of article 35 § 3 a) of the
Convention and that it does not come up against any other reason
of inadmissibility.
The court therefore declares it admissible.
B. Background
1. Parties arguments
a) The applicant
53. The applicant argues that she simply suffered a sanction
civilian as unjust as it is draconian, without being duly associated with the procedure
by the assistance of a lawyer, in defiance of the relevant jurisprudence of the
Court (Jucius and Juciuvienė v. Lithuania, no 14414/03, November 25, 2008) and
Despite the severity of the issue for her.In short, the court did not take any
measure to ensure effective representation during this procedure,
who finally led to the restriction of his ability to act.
54. In addition, the applicant specifies that, even during the second
procedure resulted in the lifting of the supervisory measure, the judge has never
evaluated his need for legal assistance (Artico v. Italy, May 13, 1980, § 33,
A.A.K.vs.Türki̇ye
11 SERIE A No 37, Granger c.United Kingdom, March 28, 1990, § 47, series A No 174,
and Timergaliyev c.Russia, no 40631/02, § 59, October 14, 2008).
55. Returning to the facts of the cause, the applicant highlights the
following elements, according to him, crucial to assess the equity of the procedure
dispute:
- Yenipazar, a district where the court was located, is a small agglomeration
and the two judges and two prosecutors stationed at the time were to
connivance;
- the tutorship action had been introduced by one of these
Prosecutors, annoyed by the number of complaints filed by the applicant;
- The lawyer who automatically committed by the Aydın bar has resigned himself without
reasonable reason;However, the said bar as well as the court accepted this
resignation, without hearing the applicant or checking the impact that it could
have on the outcome of his trial;
- The court has never considered granting new aid
jurisdictional, unlike its obligations under article 36 of the
Constitution (paragraph 44 above), nor only assured the applicant
undergoes in -depth psychiatric examinations before deciding to put it
under guardianship.
56. Beyond this procedural aspect, the applicant complains because of having
been declared incapable on the basis of insufficient reports that
doctors and the Medical Institute had written on the basis of its
distant medical history, without duly examining it;In this regard, she
hammers that his disputes against these reports have never been taken in
account by the court.
The applicant adds that having been declared incapable at the end
of such a procedure on the basis of fallacious allegations of a
prosecutor destroyed her future, when she was an architect graduated from a
renowned university.She deduces that in no case is her tutorship
could have any interest likely to justify the measurement
disproportionate which she was the victim for about four years.
57. Besides, the last expert report rendered by the hospital
Istanbul academic (paragraph 38 above) would have shown that the
Diagnosis at the origin of the declaration of disability was wrong.According to
applicant, if H.K., her husband and tutor, had not asked for the lifting of this
measure, she would have been condemned to live in the inability to act, which
would demonstrate that the national system offers no protection to people
vulnerable.
b) Government
58. The government immediately recalls that the disputed procedure was
governed by the inquisitory principle, according to which he belonged to the court of
collect all the elements of evidence, which he has not
failed to do.
A.A.K.vs.Türki̇ye
1259. With regard to the allocation of a law enforcement, the
Government stresses that the applicant's relating to the applicant had been
first welcomed by the bar, but that it canceled its
decision later due to the unacceptable behavior of the interested party.
Anyway, this decision would not have led to a disadvantage
significant for the interested party.
60. Indeed, throughout the procedure, the applicant was able
to appear to audiences, to express yourself, to challenge the elements
medical concerns her, to be interviewed by the judge and to provide himself in
Cassation.
61. In view of these elements, the government considers that the applicant has
benefited from all the necessary guarantees of an inquisitory procedure and
that if it was finally put under supervision, this decision was based on
objective medical assessments and had without dispute a legal basis
Solid, namely article 405 of the CC.
As for the question of "legitimate goal", the government refers
derechef to two medical expertise carried out by specialists, and
whose conclusions would not lend the flank to any criticism.According to these,
the applicant - who had refused to be treated - was not able to
understand and protect your interests and the disputed measure had precisely
aim to protect these.
Besides, the disputed interference would not have led to any repercussions
important on the applicant's privacy, she never suggested
that it has concretely suffered or that it has suffered damages
disproportionate to the goal pursued.
62. The government finally recalls that the measure in question was indeed
lifting under a new medical report on February 27, 2015, which
demonstrates that the diet in place in Türkiye is based on guarantees
Aligning perfectly with the relevant principles posed both by the courtyard
that by the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe (paragraphs 46 and 47
above).
2. Appreciation of the Court
a) General principles and considerations
63. No one disputes that the decision to place the applicant under guardianship
constituted an interference in the exercise of his right to respect for his life
private.This interference was provided for by law - Article 405 of the CC
(paragraph 40 above)-and she pursued a legitimate goal, namely the
protection of a person unfit to provide for their own interests due to
of a mental disorder.These points do not lend to controversy (see,
Ümit bilgiç c.Turkish, no 22398/05, § 112, September 3, 2013).
64. As for the need for interference in question in a company
democratic, the court recalls that for a question as complex as
A.A.K.vs.Türki̇ye
13The consisting in determining the mental capacities of an individual, the
authorities must generally enjoy a wide margin of appreciation;
However, this goes hand in hand with the duty of the court to exercise control
more rigorous on deprivation of legal capacity, which
undeniably constitute a serious interference in the exercise by
the person concerned with the right to respect for his privacy guaranteed by article 8 of the
Convention.Also, in cases where people with disorders
mentally were deprived of legal capacity, does the court grant a
particular importance to the quality of the decision -making process.
65. If article 8 does not contain any explicit procedural condition, the
Court has defined the procedural requirements necessary to comply with the rights which
resulting, which she often examines in combination with principles
released, among other things, from article 6, in the sense that the decision -making process
leading to interference measures must be fair and specific to
fully respect the interests protected by this provision (see, by
Example, jucius and juciuvienė, cited above, § 30, soares of Melo c.Portugal,
No 72850/14, § 65, February 16, 2016, and Mehmet Ulusoy and other c.Türkiye,
No 54969/09, § 109, June 25, 2019).This requirement thus covers procedures
administrative as well as judicial, but also goes hand in hand with the objective
wider consisting in ensuring the right respect, among other things, of privacy,
which is at the heart of the present dispute (see among others, Golder,
aforementioned, § 36, McMichael c.United Kingdom, February 24, 1995, § 91, series A
No 307-B, Bianchi, cited above, § 112, and Tapia Gasca and D. c.Spain,
No 20272/06, §§ 111-113, December 22, 2009).
66. The extent of the margin of appreciation which the authorities enjoy in
This field will therefore depend on the quality of the decision -making process: if the
procedure has been seriously deficient for one reason or another, the
conclusions of the internal authorities are more questionable (see principle 1
-paragraph 46 above;Görgülü c.Germany, no 74969/01, § 52,
February 26, 2004, Chtoukatourov c.Russia, no 44009/05, §§ 87-89,
ECDH 2008, Berková c.Slovakia, no 67149/01, § 165, March 24, 2009,
Salontaji-Drobnjak c.Serbia, no 36500/05, §§ 141-143, October 13, 2009,
Ümit Bilgiç, cited above, § 113, Lashin c.Russia, no 33117/02, §§ 79 and 80,
January 22, 2013, Ivinović c.Croatia, no 13006/13, §§ 36 and 37, September 18
2014, and A.N., cited above, §§ 116-118).
b) Application of these principles to the case
i.As for the alleged exclusion of the benefit of a consulting council
67. With regard to the decision -making aspect and as long as the
applicant denounces her exclusion from the benefit of a lawyer committed,
it should be noted that the Convention does not imply that the State must
provide free legal aid in any dispute relating to a
"Civil law".However, the court admits, like the part
A.A.K.vs.Türki̇ye
14Récérant (paragraphs 53 to 57 above), that the procedure of the species
- which had a very serious issue - had to surround themselves with the guarantees
appropriate procedurals to protect the rights of the applicant and
to take into account your interests (see, for example, H.F. v. Slovakia,
No 54797/00, § 44, November 8, 2005).
Under such guarantees, article 8 may indeed compel
authorities to provide the assistance of a lawyer when it turns out to be essential
to effective access to the judge (mutatis mutandis, Airey v. Ireland, October 9, 1979,
§ 26, Series A No 32, and Romanov c.Russia, no 63993/00, § 108, October 20
2005), taking into account the severity of the issue for the interested party (P.,
C. and S. c.United Kingdom, no 56547/00, § 100, ECDH 2002-Vi, Steel and Morris
vs.United Kingdom, no 68416/01, § 61, ECDH 2005-II, H.F. cited above, § 37, and
Ivinović, cited above, § 45, ultimately).
68. In this case, if on July 9, 2009 the Aydın bar had finally had
appointed Me M.A. in order to represent the applicant (paragraphs 19 and 20
above), she resigned the following August 27-without ever participating in the
procedure -, on the grounds that the applicant had demanded that he reject the judge of
court for unacceptable reasons (paragraphs 22 and 25 above);there's
had therefore had a contact between the two protagonists (compare mutatis
Mutandis with Salontaji-Drobnjak, cited above, § 127).Subsequently, the bar
D'Aydın said that no other lawyer was going to be appointed (paragraph 27
above) and the Istanbul bar also seems to have refused to give
Following the request for legal assistance from the applicant (paragraph 26
above).The court did not react automatically, it being understood that the
file does not include any trace of a request for legal assistance
any directly addressed to the judge.
69. As for the question of whether the conduct of Me M.A.
resigning may constitute a particular circumstance likely
to engage the responsibility of the State under the Convention (Tuziński
vs.Poland (Dec.), No 40140/98, March 30, 1999) and/or with regard to article 36
of the Constitution - as the applicant suggests (paragraph 55, ultimately,
above)-and if, consequently, the court-informed of the situation-was to
automatically replace this lawyer so that the applicant is not deprived of
practice of effective assistance (Bertuzzi v. France, no 36378/97, § 30,
ECDH 2003-III), the Court considers that they can answer them in the negative, because
appropriate procedural guarantees in question here (paragraph 65
above) are not limited to the granting of legal assistance.
70. In this context, it should be remembered that, in many cases, the fact
that an individual must be placed under guardianship because he would not have the capacity
to administer your business - as in this case - does not mean that it is
Unable to decide on his situation;In such cases, it is essential
that the person concerned has access to a court and has the possibility of being
Heard in person (see Jucius and Juciuvienė, cited above, § 30 and A.N., aforementioned,
§ 90).
A.A.K.vs.Türki̇ye
15The court must therefore verify whether, having regard to the particularities of the species and
in particular the severity of the decisions to be made, the applicant was
sufficiently associated with the decision -making process, considered in its
together, to ensure the required protection of his interests, failing which there
would have been breach of his private life because interference cannot be
considered "necessary" within the meaning of article 8 (see, ibidem, and
W. c.United Kingdom, July 8, 1987, § 64, series A No 121).
II.As for the applicant's participation in the decision -making process
71. Returning to the facts of the cause, the court observes that, notwithstanding its
psychic table, the applicant had a complete knowledge of the request for
declaration of incapacity introduced by the prosecution (compare with
Chtoukatourov, aforementioned, § 69) as well as a sufficient capacity to present its
Cause (McVicar v. United Kingdom, no 46311/99, §§ 48-62, ECDH 2002-III, and
Steel and Morris, cited above, § 61);She actually took part in the
process, throughout the audiences which followed, and where the court has
benefited from a direct relationship with the interested party (compare with
Chtoukatourov, cited above, § 91, and A.N., cited above, § 120).
Indeed, from May 14, 2009, the date of the preparatory hearing, June 15
2009, the applicant informed the court that she wanted to continue the
procedure through her lawyer and, following her resignation,
She has often appeared in consecutive hearings herself in
his statements;On July 16, 2009, she explained the exam she had passed
at Adnan Menderes University Hospital;On September 17, 2009, she made
reaching an email, reading has been given;October 1st
2009, she informed the court of her request to review at the hospital
academic of Istanbul;On October 22, 2009, it was heard by the new
judge and challenged the expert report of August 14, 2009 requesting his
Transfer to the Medical Institute, and this request was welcomed (compare
mutatis mutandis with Salontaji-Drobnjak, cited above, § 127);November 24
2009, the applicant compared with her husband H.K .;On January 21, 2010, she
was held back by the judge;On March 2, 2010, she made the dispute formed
by her husband against the report of the Medical Institute;March 2, 2010,
the previous opposition was rejected and the procedure ended in its
Presence (compare, ibidem).
72. Thus, with regard to the first instance procedure, even if the
exact content of all the applicant's statements do not emerge from the documents
that she paid to the file, she should pass to have been enough
associated with the decision -making process so as to allow him to defend his
cause, but also to allow the court to train their own opinion
on its mental capacities, as required by article 409 of the CC (paragraph 41
above), the jurisprudence of the court (see, mutatis mutandis, kovalev
vs.Russia, no 78145/01, §§ 35-37, May 10, 2007-Compare with
A.A.K.vs.Türki̇ye
17 PROCEDURE SUBSITURE on April 10, 2009 (paragraph 14 above) and
The court had decided on the basis of these exams, including the applicant
was perfectly aware of the object (compare, chtoukatourov, aforementioned,
§ 69).In fact, on August 14, 2009, the university hospital health council
by Adnan Menderes concluded that "paranoid personality disorders"
observed in the applicant were likely to justify her guardianship
(paragraph 21 above);If the interested party claims not to have been duly
examined on this occasion (paragraph 56 in limin above), this is
contradicted by the content of said report;Anyway, after having undergone
other tests and a psychological interview at the Istanbul University Hospital
(paragraph 23 above), the applicant challenged the results of the said report
and, contrary to what it suggests (paragraph 56 ultimately above)
The court welcomed this request (paragraph 28 above);THE
December 23, 2009, a counter-expertise was thus carried out by the Council of
specialists no 4 at the Medical Institute (paragraph 30 above), whose
neutrality has never been questioned (lashin, aforementioned, § 87), and whose
conclusions paid to the file on January 29, 2010 were clear enough
(paragraph 32 above) as to the possible consequences of the disorders
of the applicant on her material interests (compare, chtoukatourov, aforementioned,
§ 93), so that the rejection of the second opposition formed against the latter
Report (paragraph 33 above) cannot result in consequence.
Thus, the court cannot follow the applicant part when it criticizes the
court for having omitted to establish his judgment on "exams
in-depth psychiatrics ”(paragraph 55 ultimately above), without
in no way support the reasons.
78. The last aforementioned medical examination, carried out by experts
qualified on December 23, 2009, three months and a week before
the adoption of the trial judgment and less than a year before the judgment
of cassation, must therefore be considered "recent" (compare with H.F.,
cited above, §§ 41 and 42, lashin, cited above, §§ 83 to 86, Nikolyan c.Armenia,
No 74438/14, § 124, October 3, 2019) and convincing within the meaning of the case law of
court and principle 12 (paragraph 47 above).
79. Furthermore, this procedure has experienced two degrees of jurisdictions
(Compare with A.N., cited above, § 120);The applicant herself provided
before the Court of Cassation, whose role could be decisive in erasing a
possible initial violation of the Convention (de Haan v. Netherlands, August 26
1997, § 54, collection of judgments and decisions 1997-IV).Certainly, this appeal was
Rejected, but the applicant does not complain before the court.
80. In view of the above, Türkiye's judicial mechanism must
Pass for having proceeded with the necessary equity and diligence as well as
than having brought together enough elements to assess the faculties of the
applicant and to prevent possible injustices (see principle 7 -
paragraph 46 above;Compare, H.F., cited above, § 44).
A.A.K.vs.Türki̇ye
18IV.The ins and outs of the measure imposed on the applicant
81. On this subject, it is important to emphasize that under the judgment of the
March 2, 2010 (paragraph 33 above), the restriction of legal capacity
imposed on the applicant was not total, was limited in time and
could be challenged by the applicant herself (compare, for example,
Chtoukatourov, cited above, §§ 90 and 94, stanev, cited above, §§ 239 and 240, lashin,
aforementioned, § 90, A.N., cited above §§ 111, 123 and 126, and Nikolyan, cited above, § 122).
In this case, the disputed measure was aimed at the management of the heritage of the
applicant by her husband and tutor H.K. - whose designation agreed without
doubt to the applicant (see principles 8 and 9-paragraph 46 above)-, on
the basis of an inventory of goods, and it had a ban on
Conclude land and banking acts without the approval of the court.Powers
of the tutor to represent the applicant therefore only covered property and
the latter's financial affairs (paragraph 13 above) to the extent
provided for in the related judgment (for similar situation, in law
Finnish, see A.-M.V.vs.Finland, no 53251/13, § 85, March 23, 2017).
82. Besides, it should be noted that this measure had been imposed for
an initial duration of two years, likely to be extended for the same
duration ;it follows that in this case, in accordance with domestic law
(paragraph 42 above), the applicant benefited-like her husband
- a possibility of two -year periodic revision, for the end of the lifting of
the supervision measurement (see principle 14 - ümit bilgiç, cited above, § 114; compare,
Drobnjak, cited above, § 134, and Stanev, cited above, § 239).
83. This is a crucial guarantee: the right to ask a court
revising a declaration of inability is one of the most important to
the individual concerned because, once initiated, such a procedure is
determining for its civil rights and obligations (stanev, aforementioned,
§ 233, and Lashin, cited above, §§ 79 to 81) and, more precisely, for the exercise of
All rights and freedoms assigned by the Declaration of Inability;This
law constitutes one of the procedural rights essential to the protection of
partially incapable declared people, such as the applicant (Stanev,
aforementioned, § 241).It also suits the growing importance given
today in granting optimal legal autonomy to people
attacks of mental disorders both by national rights at European level
that the international instruments for the protection of these people, including the
Recommendation no R (99) 4 aforementioned (paragraphs 46 and 47 above) (see,
In particular, Matter c.Slovakia, no 31534/96, §§ 51 and 68, July 5, 1999,
Stanev, cited above, §§ 243 to 245, and A.N., cited above, § 126).
84. In this case, the file and the applicant's observations do not
do not include any exact mention as to why no review
was not requested at the end of the initial duration of two years, given that
The applicant was still under guardianship in March 2014 (paragraph 36 below
above).
A.A.K.vs.Türki̇ye
20fait in French, then communicated in writing on October 3, 2023, in
Application of article 77 §§ 2 and 3 of the regulation.
Hasan Bakırcıarnfinn Bårdsen
Clerk President
In this judgment is attached, in accordance with articles 45 § 2 of the
Convention and 74 § 2 of the regulation, the presentation of the separate opinion of the judge
A. Bårdsen.
A.R.B.
H.B.
A.A.K.vs.Türki̇ye - separate opinion
21 concordant bush of judge Bårdsen
88. I subscribe to the conclusion of my colleagues that there is no
had a violation of the convention in this case.I rose to this
conclusion with a little hesitation, and I would like to expose the reasons for
my questions.
89. Although the Court has chosen to examine the case alone from the angle of
Article 8 of the Convention, Article 6 § 1 is not without scope in this case.
Indeed, with regard to access to legal assistance in such
context, article 8 must be interpreted and applied to the light of principles
developed in the field of article 6 § 1. This perspective being little
present in the judgment, and since the assistance of a lawyer can be
required even within the framework of an inquisitorial procedure, I would like for my
share the following six elements.
90. First, I emphasize that the people affected by a
Guard procedure must generally be considered vulnerable.
Special procedural guarantees may be necessary to
protect the interests of people who, due to their mental disorders,
are not entirely able to act for their own account.In
the species, the authorities established that the applicant suffered from a disease
serious mental which led to direct consequences on its ability to
Make informed decisions for your own account.
91. Second, I remind you that in the guardianship procedures, it is
often necessary - and that was the case in this case - to examine not only
legal issues, but also to evaluate health in depth
mental interested parties and their interactions with others.As soon as the
applicant was considered seriously ill, she could not
reasonably be presumed capable of dealing with appreciations
legal and medical constructively.
92. Third, I note that the applicant did not have a tutor to
the time of the facts.She could not herself assume the cost of assistance
legal.If, at first, a lawyer had been appointed to
Assisting the applicant is precisely because he had been deemed necessary
to grant it legal aid.
93. Fourth, the fact that the designated lawyer has desisted in
reason for "unacceptable behavior" on the part of the applicant cannot
be retained against the latter.The behavior in question reflected a
lack of confidence of the applicant towards the judge of the administrative court.
As has already been underlined, the applicant was supposed to suffer from
Very serious mental disorders, especially paranoia.It is precisely for
These reasons that the assistance of a lawyer would have been beneficial to him.
94. Fifth, having regard to the situation in which the applicant
found before the administrative court when the designated lawyer was
withdrawn, and taking into account the above considerations, the court would have
A.A.K.vs.Türki̇ye - separate opinion
22eu strong reasons to examine automatically whether one had to designate another
lawyer.However, there is no trace of such an examination.
95. Sixthly, as soon as we recall again the fact that the
applicant was not able, according to the government, to take
informed decisions for her own account, the fact that she did not ask
It is up to the court to designate a new lawyer is hardly relevant.In addition, well
that the applicant denounced in her appeal the absence of access to a lawyer,
The very brief decision of the Court of Cassation does not assess any appreciation
about this question.
9. Despite the arguments I exhibited above, I voted in favor
an observation of non-violation of article 8. Indeed, I subscribe to the advice of
my colleagues according to which, having regard to all the facts of the case,
in particular to all measures taken to safeguard the interests of the
applicant, there was no crucial breach in the protection of life
deprived of the applicant as guaranteed by article 8 of the agreement.
