Fifth section
C.P. and M.N. c.FRANCE
(Requests nos 56513/17 and 56515/17)
STOP
Art 8 • Privacy and family life • Refusal of internal jurisdictions to examine
the applicant's action, claiming to be the biological father of a child, aimed at
challenge the paternity legally established in order to have his own, in
the application of the computation rules for the five -year foreclosure period
combined with the obligation to attract the child in the cause • requiring not having
not acted as soon as he had his paternity when he had a delay
sufficient by more than three years to initiate an action • applicant having delayed at
put in the cause the child without justifying having been able to ignore the existence of this
constant rule in internal law • conclusions of internal jurisdictions neither
arbitrary or unreasonable • Refusal based on a parentage link already established for
the child and with regard to the latter's best interests • Judicial decisions
Having not led into practice to deprive the applicant of any link with the child •
Fair balance spared between the different interests involved
Strasbourg
October 12, 2023
This judgment will become final under the conditions defined in article 44 § 2 of the
Convention.He can undergo formation of shape.
C.P. and M.N. c.FRANCE
The case C.P. and M.N. c.France,
The European Court of Human Rights (fifth section), sitting
In a room made up of:
Georges Ravarani, president,
Carlo Ranzoni,
Mārtiņš mits,
Stéphanie Mourou-Viksröm,
María Elósegui,
Mattias Guyomar,
Mykola gnatovskyy, judges,
and Martina Keller, section assistant section,
Seen :
The requests (nos 56513/17 and 56515/17) directed against the Republic
French and two nationals of this state ("the applicants") seized
the Court under article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Rights of
Man and fundamental freedoms ("the Convention") on August 1, 2017,
the decision to bring requests to the knowledge of the government
French,
parties' observations,
After having deliberated it in the Council Chamber on September 19, 2023,
Make the stop that here, adopted on this date:
INTRODUCTION
1. The request concerns, from the angle of article 8 of the Convention, the
refusal of internal jurisdictions to examine the applicant's action, which affirms
be the biological father of a child, aimed at contesting the legally paternity
established in order to have its own and the methods of applying a
foreclosure period.
ACTUALLY
2. The applicant and the applicant were born respectively in 1965 and 1967
and resident in Paris.They were represented by Me P. Spinosi, lawyer in Paris.
3. The government was represented by his agent, Mr. F. Alabrune,
Director of Legal Affairs at the Ministry of Europe and Business
foreign.
4. The applicant and her former companion lived together on July 15
2005 until the beginning of March 2012. During their common life,
two children were born: the first on July 15, 2006 and the second
(hereinafter N.), December 25, 2007. The latter was recognized by the former
The applicant's companion before her birth on December 4, 2007.
C.P. and M.N. c.FRANCE
25. At the beginning of March 2012, the applicant left her former
Companion and concludes a civil solidarity pact (PACS) with the applicant,
March 14, 2012.
6. On December 12, 2012, the applicant seized the business judge
family (JAF) for the purpose of fixing the measures relating to the two children
And asked to fix an alternating residence.During this procedure,
It evoked the action in protest of paternity diligent parallel by
the applicant (paragraph 10 below).
7. By a judgment before saying the right of February 25, 2013, the JAF ordered
a social survey and, pending the result of this survey, fixed the
habitual residence of the two children at the former companion of the
applicant, in order to maintain siblings in its familiar environment.He
exposed that, since the separation, children had stayed at home
family and had already undergone many changes in their lives, such as
the separation of their parents, the birth of half a sister,
the move of their mother with the applicant, as well as the revelation made
to N. of what he would have two fathers.He granted the applicant a right of visit
And accommodation, one in two and half of the school holidays.
8. At the end of the social investigation, by a judgment of July 26, 2013,
The JAF maintained the main residence of children at the former companion
of the applicant, granting the latter a right of visit and
accommodation, extended to every Wednesday, from the release of the classes on Tuesday
Until Wednesday evening at 7 p.m.
9. By a judgment of February 3, 2015, the Paris Court of Appeal fixed the residence
of the two alternating children, after having noted that the applicant and the father
legal were very attached parents to N. and if the applicant had left
continue a complicated personal and family situation, she was a mother
attentive to find a place in the daily life of
two children.No appeal has been made against this decision.
10. In addition to this action, on November 13, 2012, the applicant
sent a letter to the former applicant's companion to mean her
that he was the biological father of N. the next day, he assigned the legal father
from N. In order to obtain the cancellation of his recognition of paternity, to do
note his paternity with regard to N. and, in the alternative, that it is given to him
Act of what he consented to genetic expertise.The applicant did not put in
The cause N. until February 28, 2013 and the applicant until March 4, 2013.
11. by a judgment of December 17, 2013, noting that the interests
of N. were in opposition to those of his parents, the Grande Tribunal
Paris instance ordered the reopening of the debates to designate a
Administrator ad hoc.
12. By a judgment of October 21, 2014, the tribunal de grande instance made
right to the end of inadmissibility raised by the legal father and the administrator
ad hoc.He declared inadmissible the action in authorship of paternity on the
foundation of article 333 paragraph 2 of the civil code, which provides for the following:
C.P. and M.N. c.FRANCE
3 "(...) No one, except for the public prosecutor, cannot contest the parentage when the
possession of state in accordance with recognition has lasted at least five years since the
Birth or recognition, if it was made later (...).»»
13. In addition, he noted, on the one hand, that the child had not been put in
The cause that on February 28, 2013, after December 25, 2012, date
expiration of the five -year period from the birth of the child and,
on the other hand, that it was constant that action in the contestation of paternity
was to be directed not only against the father whose parentage is disputed
But also against the child.The court deduced that on the date of
February 28, 2013, the applicant was foreclosure and that he could no longer act against
the legal father, the latter which can on that date take advantage of a possession
state in accordance with its recognition of paternity for a period of
minus five years.
14. By a judgment of September 22, 2015, the Paris Court of Appeal confirmed
This judgment.The judgment is written as follows:
"The ad hoc administrator of [N.] who spoke twice with him [a]
mentioned in his report of May 22, 2015 that the child [then aged 7 and
Almost 5 months] did not want to be heard, wishing "to be left alone";
(...) If a period of less than five years has passed between the birth of [N.] (the
December 25, 2007) and the assignment in the observation of paternity initiated by [the
applicant] (November 14, 2012), it was not until February 28, 2013, be subsequently
at this time, that the mother of the minor child (...), was assigned to the quality of representative
legal of N. while the action in authorship of paternity must be directed both
against the [legal] father and against the child (...);
(...) On the existence of a possession of state in accordance with the title, (...) [the applicants]
oppose the absence of peaceful, public and non -equivocal character of possession
as a child of [the former companion] on the grounds that [N.] learned in 2012 by his mother
that he did not come from the latter's works, that a letter was sent to [the old
applicant's companion] on November 13, 2012 informing him of the procedure
envisaged, that the assignment as a Paternity contestation has been issued to [the latter]
14 [November] 2012 and that the family entourage knew that he was not the father
of [N.];
But (...) Neither this revelation from the mother to the child, nor the delivery of a letter followed
From assignment to the request [of the applicant] before the expiration of the prefix period of five years
could not be enough to destroy peaceful and unrevacious continuing state possession
of children [with regard to the former applicant's companion] (...);(...) Indeed, the child
which has been the name of [the former applicant's former companion] which
is recognized by public authority and by his own family as his father as well as
The latter justifies by the certificates produced, has always been treated by [the old
companion of the applicant] like her son, both during common life with [the
applicant] that after the separation of the couple, in March 2012, [N.] (...);(...) it suits
to observe that the request [in fixing of the child's residence] of the mother dates from
December 12, 2012 at the very moment when [the applicant] had the assignment in
contestation of paternity [and that] it is in vain that it is argued that these two
procedures pursue different goals when they both concern the
situation of [N.];
C.P. and M.N. c.FRANCE
4 (...) In addition, regardless of the revelation made [to the legal father] that he would not be the father
biological of the child in 2009, even 2007, as long as he has always
contained as such;(...) Furthermore, as the first judges,
The social survey of June 13, 2013, carried out at the request of the family affairs judge
establishes that the father has invested his paternity with regard to his two children with them a
unwavering link;
(...) [The applicant] is still availing of the best interests of the child to see established
"His real parentage" while the decision of the legislator who, at the end of a
period of five years during which the legal father behaved continuously,
peaceful and unresolved as the child's father, has made the truth prevail
sociological, by no longer making it possible to seek whether or not he was the biological father did not
could be considered as contrary to this higher interest;(...) in this regard
psychological evaluation (...), as the child's interview with the administrator
ad hoc demonstrate that the child is taken in a conflict of loyalty and that it is important to
Give him a lasting response as to the identity of his father;(...) "
15. The applicants formed a cassation appeal, specifying then
Clearly that the applicant would have been warned of "his paternity" at the end of June 2009.
16. On February 1, 2017, the Court of Cassation rejected the appeal of
applicants.On the means of the lack of foreclosure, the Court of Cassation
opera a reason substitution in the following terms:
"(...) If the foreclosure period provided for in article 333, paragraph 2, of the Civil Code may be
interrupted by a court request, in accordance with the first paragraph of
Article 2241 of the same code, the action in authorship of paternity must, barely
of inadmissibility, to be directed against the father whose parentage is disputed and against
the child;(...) The Court of Appeal having found that [N.] had not been assigned in the
five -year period following his birth, it follows that the action was inadmissible,
the assignment of November 14, 2012, directed against the legal father alone, excluding
the child, having not been able to interrupt the time of foreclosure;(...) by this reason for pure right,
substituted, under the conditions of article 1015 of the Code of Civil Procedure, for those
Criticized, the decision is legally justified of this chief;(...) "
17. On the means drawn from the violation of article 8 of the Convention, the judgment
is motivated as follows:
"(...) After having noticed the possession of the child with regard to [the old
companion of the applicant], the judgment states that the legislator has chosen to prevail
sociological reality at the end of a five -year period during which the father
legal behaved continuously, peaceful and unresolved as the father of
the child, which cannot be considered as contrary to the best interests of
this one ;(...) The Court of Appeal, which thus carried out the allegedly omitted research [of
The balance of interests involved], legally justified its decision;(...) "
The internal legal framework and practice
Relevant
I. The notion of possession of a state concerning the child
18. Article 332 of the Civil Code provides that paternity can be disputed
By reporting proof that the author of the recognition is not the father.
C.P. and M.N. c.FRANCE
5 by elsewhere, in accordance with article 311-1 of the same code, possession
state is established by a sufficient meeting of facts which reveal the link of
parentage and kinship between a person and the family to which they are said
belong.This article not exhaustively specifies the main
elements that can be retained, namely:
- the fact for the person, whose parentage is disputed, of having treated
child like his and does for this child to have considered this
person like his father [Tractatus];
- the fact for this same person to have provided education and
the maintenance of this child [Tractatus];
- The fact for this same person to have recognized the child as his own
in the eyes of public authority, society or within his family [FAMA];
- The fact for the child for having brought the name of this same person
[Nomen].
19. According to a well -established case law, the meeting of all these elements
it is not necessary for the possession of state to be considered
as established.It is enough, as provided for in article 311-1 of the same code,
that there is a sufficient meeting of facts.
20. Once established, this possession of a child's state is to prove until
contrary proof (civ. 1st, July 5, 1988, no 86-14.489, Bull. Civ. I, no 217,
Civ.1st, March 16, 1999, no 97-11.717, Bull.Civ.I, no 98 and civ.1st, 20 Feb.
2001, no 99-14.566).It is therefore a simple presumption that everything
interested is entitled to fight by all means (civ. 1st, 7 Feb 1989,
No 87-16.315, Bull.Civ.I, no 65, and civ.1st, October 27, 1992,
Appeal No 91-11.751, Bull.Civ.I, no 273).
21. Pursuant to article 311-2 of the Civil Code, this possession of a state
Must also be continuous, peaceful, public and non -equivocal.There
possession of state should not have been obtained in particular through
Constraints, pressures or violence (Civ. 1st, Nov. 7, 2018, no 17-26.445).
As for the required continuity, it does not necessarily imply a
community of life or constant relationships, the simple fact that the child does not
does not reside with both parents, for example because an alternating residence
is implemented, cannot prevent the creation of possession
of state.It is up to the trial judges to assess, given the
circumstances of the cause, if the facts that characterize a parentage report
can usually be noted (civ. 1st, March 3, 1992, no 90-15.313,
Bull.Civ.I, no 69).
II.State possession corroborated by a title
For five years hinders a dispute
Paternity
22. Article 4 of the authorization law of December 9, 2004, tending to a
simplification of the law, provided for a modification by means of order of
C.P. and M.N. c.FRANCE
Dispositions of the Civil Code relating to parentage in order to secure the link of
filiation and preserve children from filiation conflicts.
Ordinance No 2005-759 of July 4, 2005 reforming parentage
Thus created an article 333 providing that, as soon as possession of a state
of children has lasted five years since birth or recognition, if it has been
Subsequently made, no one can no longer challenge this established parentage.
Article 333, paragraph 2, of the Civil Code, in its drafting applicable to
Present dispute, is written as follows:
"When possession of state is in accordance with the title, only the child can act, one
of his father and mother or the one who claims to be the true parent.The action is prescribed by
five years from the day when possession of state has ceased or the death of the parent whose
filiation link is disputed.
Null, except for the public prosecutor, cannot contest the parentage when the
possession of a state in accordance with the title has lasted at least five years since the birth or
recognition, if made later.»»
23. This article provides for a period called foreclosure or prefix, beyond
from which action is considered to be extinguished.Unlike the
prescription, it is a question of consolidating a situation and not of sanctioning the
negligence of a party to exercise its rights.
24. The foreclosure period is generally presented as a period
rigorous since it is insuspected interruption and must be relieved
By the judge, in accordance with article 125 of the Code of Civil Procedure.By
elsewhere, if, when the judge rules, the situation which caused the appeal
To this end of non-reception is subject to regularization, it must
intervene before the expiration of the deadline (see for example, for a
Jurisprudence already established at the time of the facts and in contrario Civ.1st,
January 14, 1997, appeal no 94-19.367, Bull.Civ.I, no 11, with regard to a
inadmissibility for lack of quality to act dismissed as soon as a
regularization had occurred before the expiration of the foreclosure period).
25. In addition, on the basis of article 8 of the Convention, the Court of
cassation judges, if the application of a foreclosure period or a period of
prescription limiting a person's right to have their link of
paternal parentage, constitutes an interference in the exercise of the right to respect
of his private and family life guaranteed to article 8 of the Convention, the end of
opposite notes provided for in article 333 of the Civil Code pursues a goal
legitimate, in that it tends to protect the rights and freedoms of third parties as well as
Legal certainty.Noting that the provisions of article 333 of the code
civilians are an obstacle to the judicial establishment of parentage, the Court of
Cassation takes control of the motivation for the decision of the Court of Appeal
and check that the latter has made a balance of various interests
in the presence, with regard to the circumstances specific to each case, before
conclude or not that the lack of excessive involvement in view of the goal pursued
(See, for a case law already established at the time of the facts, civ. 1st,
July 6, 2016, appeal no 15-19.853, Bull.Civ.I, no 157).
C.P. and M.N. c.FRANCE
7iii.Paternity contestation actions call
The questioning of the child
26. Action for authorship of paternity established by a corroborated title by
State possession implies attracting in the cause, in addition to the author of the
recognition whose parentage is disputed, the child and if he is minor his
or its legal representatives.If the interests of the minor child appear in
Opposition with those of its legal representatives, an ad hoc administrator
must be designated.Point 3. 1. 2. of paragraph III of the circular of June 30
2006 presentation of ordinance no 2005-759 of July 4, 2005, relative
to disputes when the title is corroborated by possession of state, specifies
the following elements :
"The action exerted by the parent who claims to be such is directed against the child and his or his
its legal representatives.
The interests of the minor child appear in all cases in opposition to those
of its legal representatives;An ad hoc administrator must therefore be appointed by the judge
guardianships or that responsible for the body, in order to represent it (art 388-2).»»
27. The Court of Cassation considers that action in authorship
remains admissible if "(...) before the expiration [of the] period [of five years provided for
Article 333 of the Civil Code, paragraph 2] was called to the instance the administrator
ad hoc designated, as required by any dispute of parentage, to
Represent the minor ”(Civ. 1st, November 6, 2013, appeal no 12-19.269).
28. In addition, article 2241 paragraph 2 of the Civil Code, in its drafting
The result of Law No. 2008-561 of June 17, 2008, reforming prescription
in civil matters, provides that:
"The court -request, even in summary proceedings, interrupts the limitation period as well as
The foreclosure period.
It is the same when it is brought before an incompetent jurisdiction or
When the act of referral to the jurisdiction is canceled by the effect of a procedural defect.»»
It appears from parliamentary debates only if the legislator wanted a
simple procedural error does not obstruct the interruption of a period, it
did not want to extend this interrupting effect to situations in which
The inadmissibility sanctions the lack of diligence of the applicant (report to the
Senate (No. 83) by M. L. BETEILLE, p.47– Reason taken identical by E. injuries
relation to the year (no 847), and Claude Brenner, "of some aspects
procedural reform of the extinguishing prescription ”, review of the law of
2008 contracts, no4 p.1431).The Court of Cassation considers, in the same
meaning, that this article only applies in cases of cancellation of the act of
referral by the effect of a real procedural defect, that is to say for
simple non -compliance with the rules for the form of assignment (see, for a
Jurisprudence already established at the time of the facts, CIV.2nd, opinion, Oct. 8, 2015,
No 14-17.952, Com., January 26, 2016, appeal no 14-17.952, Bull.2016, IV,
No 17, and civ.2nd, March 21, 2019, appeal no 17-10.663).
C.P. and M.N. c.FRANCE
8 on the right
I. Junction of requests
29. Having regard to the similarity of the object of requests, the Court judges appropriate
to examine them together in a single judgment.
II.On the alleged violation of article 8 of the
Convention
30. The applicants complain about the refusal of the internal jurisdictions
to examine the action of the applicant aimed at contesting the paternity of the legal father
with a view to establishing that of the applicant.They argue that by declaring
the action inadmissible, the internal jurisdictions have made an application too much
rigid of the end of inadmissibility provided for in paragraph 2 of article 333 of the code
civilian, by making an excessively formalist prevailing a requirement
purely procedural.They believe that these same jurisdictions have
So not to spare a fair balance between competing rights and interests in
game.
31. They invoke article 8 of the Convention, which is thus labeled:
"1. Everyone has the right to respect for their private and family life (...).
2. There may not be interference of a public authority in the exercise of this right that
as long as this interference is provided for by law and that it constitutes a measure which,
in a democratic society, is necessary for national security, to the safety
public, the country's economic well-being, the defense of order and prevention
criminal offenses, protection of health or morality, or protection
rights and freedoms of others.»»
A. On admissibility
32. The Court notes that the applicants complain of a violation of
their right to respect for their private and family life.The court recalls that the
notion of "family life" referred to in article 8 of the Convention is limited to
not solely based on marriage and can include other links
De facto "family" (Keegan v. Ireland, May 26, 1994, § 44, series A No 290,
and Kroon and others c.Netherlands, October 27, 1994, § 30, series A No 297-C).By
elsewhere, without the need to determine whether the links between a
applicant and the child constitute a sufficient base for them to be able to
fall under the concept of "family life" referred to in article 8 § 1 of the
Convention, she recalls that she has already considered that procedures in
reconnaissance or protest of paternity fall under the concept of "life
private ”in the sense of this provision, of the alleged father, because they include
Important aspects of the latter's identity (Backlund v. Finland,
No 36498/05, § 37, July 6, 2010, Ahrens c.Germany, no 45071/09, § 60,
March 22, 2012, Marinis c.Greece, no 3004/10, § 58, October 9, 2014, and
C.P. and M.N. c.FRANCE
9L.D.and P.K. c.Bulgaria, nos 7949/11 and 45522/13, §§ 54-56, December 8
2016).
33. In the present case, the Court sees no reason to decide
differently with regard to the applicant.She considers that the situation
denounced by the latter falls within the scope of article 8 of the
Convention as soon as it aims to have paternity established instead of a
other.She also notes that he has no doubt that this same
situation also affects the applicant's family life.THE
Government no longer challenges, moreover, in its latest
observations, the applicability of article 8 of the Convention and recognizes that
The question subject to the Court concerns the right to family life of the
applicant and the right to the applicant's privacy.
34. Also finding that the request is not clearly badly
founded or inadmissible for another reason referred to in article 35 of the Convention,
The court declares it admissible.
B. Basically
1. Parties arguments
a) The applicants
35. The applicants argue that the application made in this case by the
internal jurisdictions of the provisions of internal law did not allow them
to challenge the recognition of paternity and to have reality established
biological.Based on the judgments of the Shofman court c.Russia
(No 74826/01, §§ 44-45, November 24, 2005) and Phinikaridou c.Cyprus
(no 23890/02, § 65, December 20, 2007), they argue that the application of a
rigid time preventing the exercise of an action in search of paternity
and the recourse in an excessively formalist way to a requirement of order
purely procedural, undermines the very substance of the right to respect
of their privacy guaranteed by article 8 of the Convention.They believe that
jurisdictions have not sufficiently taken into account the circumstances
specific to the species, in particular knowledge by the legal father of
Facts relating to the paternal parentage of N.
36. Based on the judgments of the court kautzor v.Germany
(No 23338/09, § 73, March 22, 2012), Jäggi c.Switzerland (no 58757/00, § 38,
ECDH 2006-X), and Lacácel Menéndez c.Spain (no 41745/02, June 15
2006), the applicants argue that the national authorities, who have not
prevails biological truth in the circumstances of the case, have not
can spare a fair balance between the various rights and interests at stake,
thus offending the constant jurisprudence of the court.
C.P. and M.N. c.FRANCE
10b) the government
37. The Government maintains that the applicable internal rules
to action in protest and recognition of paternity, such as planned
by the Civil Code, are clear and pursue a legitimate goal, which is to ensure
compliance with the principle of legal certainty as well as respect for third parties, in
prevailing, at the expiration of a period of five years, a stable situation
corresponding to social reality.Based in particular on the Ahrens judgment
(cited above, §§ 72, 73 and 77), he also considers that national jurisdictions,
by characterizing the factual elements, with regard to the circumstances of the case,
state possession in accordance with the recognition of paternity having lasted
five years, have managed to spare a fair balance between competing interests in
presence.
38. The government argues, as such and in the first place, that the father
legal, having behaved since the birth of the child as a father, even
After being informed of the fact that he would not be his biological father, could
Justify a peaceful and unresolved state possession.According to him, such
stable possession for five years, not seriously contested by the
applicants, and the choice of legislator to make reality prevail
sociological cannot be considered as contrary to interest
superior of the child.
39. Second, he considers that the applicant, who claims to be the father
biological of N., had a passive attitude, since he started the
steps to have a parentage link that in November 2012, be
Three years after knowing that he would be his biological father.Finally, he does
Note that judicial decisions have not led to depriving the applicant
any link with the child, since an alternating residence between the applicant and
The legal father has been set up, allowing the applicant, who lives with the
Requesting, to maintain with this child a sustained link.
2. Appreciation of the Court
a) Principles emanating from the jurisprudence of the Court
40. The court recalls that, in a context very similar to that of
The species concerning the question of the legal status of the child, it estimated
that the state had an extended margin of appreciation, having regard to
particular to the need to spare a balance between private interests or
competing audiences and the lack of a common approach in law
contracting states, as opposed to contact or information rights,
where court control is stricter and the margin of appreciation of the state
weaker (ahrens, cited above, § 70, L.D. and P.K. C. Bulgaria, cited above, §§ 59-60,
and Koychev c.Bulgaria, no 32495/15, §§ 56-58, October 13, 2020).However,
Even in the case of limited control, the choices made by the State
However, do not escape an examination by the Court.This must examine,
In the light of the whole case, the reasons for which it was taken into account
C.P. and M.N. c.FRANCE
11 To achieve the solution chosen and seek if a fair balance has been
spared between the various interests involved.In doing so, she must wear
particular attention to the essential principle according to which, whenever
The situation of a child is in question, his interest must take precedence (see in particular
Wagner and J.M.W.L.vs.Luxembourg, no 76240/01, §§ 133-134, June 28, 2007,
and Mandet c.France, no 30955/12, § 53, January 14, 2016).
41. The parents' interest remains a factor in the balance of
different interests at stake, in particular by ensuring contact
regular with the child (Neulinger and Shuruk c. Switzerland [GC], no 41615/07,
§ 134, ECDH 2010).However, the court does not have the task of replacing
to internal authorities, who benefit from direct relations with all
interested, but to assess the decisions from the angle of the agreement
that they have rendered in the exercise of their appreciation power (see,
Among others A.L. c.Poland, no 28609/08, § 66, February 18, 2014).
42. In some cases, the Court thus considered that despite the
margin of assessment granted to states in this area, article 8 of the
Convention requires that the biological father is not completely prevented
to establish his paternity or excluded from the child's life unless there are reasons
imperatives linked to the latter's best interest in doing so.She has so
judged that an absolute impossibility for a man claiming to be the Father
biological to seek to establish his paternity, on the sole reason that another man
has already recognized the child, without examining the particular circumstances of
the species and the various interests at stake, unrecognized article 8 of the
Convention (L.D. and P.K. c. Bulgaria, cited above, § 75, and Koychev, cited above,
§§ 62-68).
43. In other cases, the Court concluded that the violation of
Article 8 of the Convention when the refusal to examine requests in
search for paternity of the applicants was founded not only on the fact that
The child already had an established parentage link but also on others
relevant circumstances, such as the existence of a stable family life
Between the child and his legitimate mother and father (Ahrens, aforementioned, § 74 Ultimately,
Kautzor, aforementioned, § 77 in fine, and marinis, cited above, § 77) or on appreciation
internal courts according to which, in the concrete case, the authorization
a search for paternity would not be in the interest of the child (Nylund
vs.Finland (Dec.), No 27110/95, ECDH 1999 VI, Krisztián Barnabás Tóth
vs.Hungary, no 8494/06, §§ 33-38, February 12, 2013, and Fröhlich c.Germany,
No 16112/15, §§ 62 to 66, July 26, 2018).
44. The Court takes into account the decision -making process in particular and checks
that it had certain guarantees such as the detailed examination
facts on the part of the competent authorities, the balance by these
authorities of the various interests at stake or the possibility for the applicant
to expose his position and personal situation, so as to assure him
Protection required of his interests (Ahrens, aforementioned, § 76, and Krisztián Barnabás
Tóth, cited above, §§ 33 and 36).
C.P. and M.N. c.FRANCE
1245. Regarding deadlines to act or other limitations to the introduction
of an action in research or contestation of paternity, the court admits that these
limits can be justified by the desire to ensure legal certainty and
the definitive nature of family relationships and thus protect both
interests of the child and those of the legal fathers, in order to protect them from
late complaints (see, for example, phinikaridou, aforementioned, § 51 and the
Jurisprudence cited there, and A.L. c.Poland, aforementioned, § 64).She judges
However, that a rigid period leading to an absolute impossibility of exercising
an action for paternity, applied independently of
circumstances of the case, undermines the very substance of the right to
compliance with privacy guaranteed by article 8 of the Convention (Backlund,
aforementioned, §§ 55-57, Grönmark c.Finland, no 17038/04, §§ 55 and 57, July 6
2010, Röman c.Finland, no 13072/05, §§ 55-58, January 29, 2013, and
Doktorov c.Bulgaria, no 15074/08, §§ 31-32, April 5, 2018).
46. Finally, in Konstantinidis c.Greece (no 58809/09, § 61,
April 3, 2014, and Silva and Mondim Correia c.Portugal, our 72105/14
and 20415/15, § 68, October 3, 2017), the Court judged that the vital interest of
applicant that the biological truth is legally established does not dispense them
not to comply with the requirements laid down by domestic law and to
proof of diligence so that the internal jurisdictions could carry out a
just appreciation of the competing interests involved.
b) Application in this case
47. The refusal to examine paternity action constitutes in this case a
Interference within the meaning of article 8 of the Convention.Such interference
ignore article 8 unless, "provided for by law", it pursues one or more goals
legitimate provided for in paragraph 2 and is, moreover, "necessary in a company
democratic ”.The court notes in this regard that the applicants do not dispute
The fact that the interference denounced had a legal basis in French law.It is not
no more disputed than the refusal to examine the action in paternity had
for the aim "the protection of the rights and freedoms of others" and that this objective,
aimed at promoting parentage corresponding to social and family reality,
may justify a limitation of the possibility of establishing biological paternity
(Ahrens, cited above, §§ 74-75, and mutatis mutandis Fröhlich, cited above, § 42).
48. The Court notes that the applicants essentially dispute the
predictability and clarity of the rules concerning the computation of the
foreclosure.Indeed, the applicants argue that the refusal to admit
the action to challenge paternity due to the application of this period of
foreclosure combined with the obligation to attract in the cause the child constitutes,
In the particular circumstances of the case, interference
disproportionate to the goal pursued by the legislator.They argue that in
reason for an overly rigid application of purely procedural requirements
and thus prevailing social reality on the search for truth
C.P. and M.N. c.FRANCE
13Biological, internal jurisdictions have failed to spare a fair balance
between the rights and competing interests involved.
49. The courtyard must therefore, in the light of the whole case, on the one hand,
Check whether the rules for computing the foreclosure period that led the
internal jurisdictions to declare the action of the inadmissible applicant were
applied in a manner compatible with the Convention and, on the other hand,
examine whether the decision -making process has led to the impossibility of
contest the parentage established by a recognition of paternity to make
establish another parentage link included certain guarantees, especially if
the reasons invoked by these internal jurisdictions were relevant and
sufficient, within the meaning of paragraph 2 of article 8.
50. Regarding the application made by the internal jurisdictions of
rules for computing the foreclosure period combined with the obligation to
put in the cause the child, the court notes that, in the circumstances
specific to the species, the foreclosure period has not prevented in the
practice the applicant to act earlier since he admits having been warned that he
was the biological father of the child at the end of June 2009
(paragraph 15 above) and that he then had a delay which appears
sufficient by more than three years to initiate an action in order to assert its
interest, the five -year foreclosure period expiring on December 25, 2012 (see
Conversely, Doktorov, aforementioned, § 29, concerning a short period of one year having
expired before the applicant learned the facts justifying his disavowal as
paternity).The court noted in this respect that the applicants have not reported or before
internal jurisdictions or before her, of no reason that would have them
prevented from acting earlier, when N. was then only one year old and six months old,
thus leaving a stable social situation in time of which they
cannot now challenge reality.
51. The Court also observes that the applicant's action has been declared
inadmissible, on the grounds that the latter had been slow to put in the cause N., and
More specifically his legal representative with regard to a child still minor.
Indeed, the applicant did not carry out this formality until February 28, 2013, be
three months after the initial referral to the jurisdiction of November 14, 2012. The
Court notes that he then had a period of more than a month to regularize
his action, the foreclosure period expiring December 25, 2012, which left him
sufficient time to comply with the rules of the
procedure.The applicants did not present any element to the
internal jurisdictions and the court of nature to demonstrate that the applicant,
represented before the jurisdiction of first instance by a lawyer, could
ignore the existence of this constant rule in internal law, since Applicable
as well before and after the reform of parentage law (paragraphs 18
and 27 above).Under these conditions, the applicants' argument according to which
paternity action has been rejected due to a rigid application and
formalist procedural rules does not appear founded.
C.P. and M.N. c.FRANCE
1452. The court also observes, with the Court of Appeal, that the applicant
did not have to challenge paternity until the applicant asked for
At the same time the fixing of the residence of N., alternating in his mother and
his legal father (paragraphs 6, 10 and 14 above).If the court is aware
that, in certain circumstances, the best interests of the child may be
knowing her true genetic identity she observes that the applicant, who
argues that there would be no doubt about the real paternity of N., would have
been the best placed person to intervene spontaneously in the
procedure, without waiting to be attractive in a forced manner, leaving
last a conflictual situation and more and more
Problem for the child (R.L. and others c. Denmark, no 52629/11, § 48,
March 7, 2017).However, the Court recalls that the vital interest of the applicants for what
the biological truth is legally established does not exempt them from
comply with the requirements posed by domestic law and to be
diligence so that internal jurisdictions can proceed to a fair
appreciation of competing interests in the presence (konstantinidis, aforementioned,
§ 61, Silva and Mondim Correia, cited above, § 68, and Lavanchy c.Swiss,
No 69997/17, §§ 36 to 39, October 19, 2021).
53. With regard to the quality of the decision -making process, the Court is
First of all that the court of appeal characterized, under the control of the court of
cassation and by reasons which appear relevant and sufficient, the
factual elements allowing him, in the circumstances of the case, to
Check the existence of a state possession in accordance with the recognition of
paternity as well as unwavering links existing between the legal father and the child
(paragraph 14 above) and consequently a stable social reality during
at least five years (paragraphs 18 and 20 above).The Court also notes
that the court of appeal, still under the control of the Court of Cassation, was able to
note that this possession was peaceful, public and unrevited and that
the simple fact that the legal father knew, at one time or another, that he existed
a doubt about his fatherhood alone could not question the fact that he
has always behaved like a father for N. the court observes as such
that the applicants do not allege that this possession of a state would have been
acquired by fraud, constraints, pressure or violence (paragraph 20
above).Under these conditions, the court therefore does not see any reason for
Get away from the conclusions of the internal jurisdictions which do not appear or
arbitrary or unreasonable.
54. Furthermore, the Court notes that the Court of Appeal founded its refusal
to examine the request for the authorship of the applicant not
only on the fact that the child already had an established parentage link, but
also with regard to the latter's best interest, which was then aged to
only seven years and was taken in a conflict of loyalty to his mother
and his legal father (paragraph 14 above).The Court notes that N.,
represented in the procedure by an ad hoc administrator who maintained himself
twice with him, said, through the latter, that he did not
C.P. and M.N. c.FRANCE
15s not been heard by the judges and wanted us to "leave him
quiet ”(paragraph 14 above).The Court therefore believes that the courtyard
appeal, under the control of the Court of Cassation (paragraph 17 above), a
could estimate that he was not in the best interests of the child to be
Faced with the question of paternity with regard in particular of their young age
(Fröhlich, aforementioned, § 64, concerning the case of a six -year -old child), preferring to
This stage maintaining it in the family environment to which it was
Accustomed since the separation of his legal father and his mother (paragraph 14
above).The court, which does not have the task of replacing the authorities
internal, which benefit from direct relationships with all those concerned
(A.L. c. Poland, aforementioned, § 66), therefore sees no reasons to move away from
These conclusions, the applicants who have not presented in this regard, nor
in front of the internal courts, nor before the court, which could return to
cause these (ahrens, aforementioned, § 77).
55. Furthermore, the Court notes that judicial decisions have not
led in practice, as the government points out, to deprive the applicant
of any link with N., since as from July 26, 2013, the courts
internal has gradually implemented a right of visit and accommodation
enlarged then an alternating residence, allowing him to maintain with the child a
sustained link.
56. It follows from all of these elements that the internal jurisdictions,
have known, in the particular circumstances of the species, while taking into account
of the legitimate goal pursued by the legislator (paragraph 24 above),
spare a fair balance between the various interests in presence, without
the rules for the computation of the five -year period as they have been
applied does not affect the very substance of the right to compliance with
Privacy and family life guaranteed by article 8 of the Convention.
57. As a result, there was no violation of article 8 of the Convention.
By these reasons, the courtyard
1. Unanimously, to join the requests;
2. Unanimously, admissible requests;
3. said, by six votes against one, that there was no violation of article 8 of
The Convention.
C.P. and M.N. c.FRANCE
16 FRANCE in French, then communicated in writing on October 12, 2023, in
Application of article 77 §§ 2 and 3 of the regulation.
Martina Keller Georges Ravarani
Assistant president president
In this judgment is attached, in accordance with articles 45 § 2 of the
Convention and 74 § 2 of the regulation, the presentation of the separate opinion of the judge
Stéphanie Mourou-Viksröm.
G.R.
M.K.
C.P. and M.N. c.France - separate opinion
17 Popinion Dissident of judge Mourou-Vikström
I did not join the majority of the room which concluded that
non-violation of article 8 of the agreement in this case which concerns
the procedural requirements of questioning the child and the mother in
An action in authorship.The reasons that lead me to
to think that an attack on the applicant's privacy must be
observed are as follows:
It appears from the provisions of article 333 paragraph 2 of the Civil Code that the deadline
To exercise an action in authorship is 5 years.
The child being born on December 25, 2007, the deadline expired on December 25
2012.
The applicant, as a supposed biological father, has formalized a
Assignment for the end of cancellation of the father's paternity recognition
legal, November 14, 2012, therefore within the legal period.
On the other hand, it appears that he has attractive in the cause of the child on February 28, 2013
and the mother of the child on March 4, 2013. Certainly, these implications are
intervened outside the 5 -year period.However, it is necessary to consider
that not only can they be considered as being
accessories to the main action to be protected from paternity and therefore that a
certain flexibility can be accepted concerning their regularization, but also,
that the legal basis poses a problem.Indeed, the requirement of questioning does not
does not come up with the law but of a jurisprudence supposedly well established and
of a circular enacted by the Ministry of Justice, dated June 30, 2006,
whose accessibility with regard to the jurisprudence of the Court is questionable.
Finally, while the internal jurisdictions opposed the applicant the
foreclosure of his action by first instance judgment of October 21
2014, confirmed on appeal on September 22, 2015 and in cassation on February 1
2017, on the grounds that the accused should have taken place before
December 25, 2012, how to explain that the court of first instance has
reopened the debates on December 17, 2013 in order to request the designation of a
Administrator for the purpose of representing the child?This decision which requires a
question posterior to the date of December 24, 2012 cannot be
including as a validation by the internal courts of a
regularization occurred after the foreclosure date which is therefore intended to
apply to the main action.
C.P. and M.N. c.France - separate opinion
18th, the Court of Cassation operated in the motivation of its judgment a
substitution of reasons concerning the inadmissibility of action.Indeed, she has
referred to article 2241 of the civil code which relates to the causes of interruption of
foreclosure period but which is not the textual legal support forcing the
questioning of the child and the mother as part of the action in
Paternity challenge.In addition, the well -established and constant character of
the case law imposing the questioning of the child and the mother, in the
strict period of 5 years, in matters of authorship of paternity, is subject to
discussion, only one case being cited in the chamber stop (civ. 1st,
Nov. 6, 2013, appeal No12-19.269).
In such a sensitive and related matter such as the
recognition of paternity, it should be recalled that the Convention aims at
guarantee, more than in any other field, not theoretical rights or
illusory, but concrete and effective rights.The procedural requirement posed
whose legal basis cannot be considered as established, accessible and
predictable and the end of permanent report opposed to the applicant are
nature to lead to a violation of article 8 of the Convention.
C.P. and M.N. c.FRANCE
19 year
Request list
No. Nonom request for the case introduced the represented by
1. 56513/17 C.P. c.France 08/01/2017 Patrice Spinosi
2. 56515/17 M.N. c.France 08/01/2017 Patrice Spinosi
